



The Merrimack River Watershed Council was formed in 1976 by local activists and regional planning commissions to involve citizens in cleaning up the Merrimack River, when the Merrimack was one of the ten most polluted rivers in the country. We became the MRWC, Inc., a non-profit under 501(c)(3) in 1978.

Our mission is:

“To protect, improve and preserve a healthy ecosystem for the mutual well being of the people and wildlife of the Merrimack River Watershed Community through education, advocacy and science.”

River restoration and protection continues today…

The Industrial Revolution found its birthplace in the Merrimack River Valley, along with the Blackstone River, and now a new revolution in sustainability is running through the Valley. Once one of the 10 most polluted rivers in the country, the Merrimack is in much better shape then in the industrial past.  The largest threat to the Merrimack today is the loss of forested land along the river’s edge. The US Forest Service has ranked the Merrimack River the most threatened river in the country in terms of loss of privately owned forested land due to housing pressures, 4th for associated impacts to water quality, and 7th for loss of species-at-risk.

Why does it matter? It matters to people and wildlife. 600,000 people depend on the river as a source of drinking water.




Staff 

Caroly Shumway, Ph.D., Executive Director

Caroly joined thePhoto MRWC as Executive Director in April, 2012.  She has 20 years of experience in conservation and natural resource management, policy,  and  outreach in the U.S., Africa, and Asia. Her policy experience ranges from local land use and redevelopment to state and federal agencies to the UN.  She has worked on large rivers (Congo), lakes (Lake Tanganyika), estuaries (RI’s salt ponds), and wetlands. She was previously the Director of Conservation Science for The Nature Conservancy’s RI Chapter, and Senior Scientist for Aquatic Biodiversity at the New England Aquarium.   In addition to her work at MRWC, she is President of the  North Smithfield Land Trust, Chair of the Valley Alliance for Smart Growth,  Steering Committee member for the Blackstone Valley Independent Business Alliance, and a member of the Ordinance Development Committee for the Town of North Smithfield, RI, focusing on water protection and stormwater management. She is also the Chair of the Science and Data Working Group for the Atlantic Coastal Fish Habitat Partnership.  She is a coauthor of Restore America’s Estuaries 2012 book on “Restore-Adapt-Mitigate: Responding to Climate Change through Coastal Habitat Restoration. Caroly holds a BA in Biology from Wellesley College, and a Ph.D. in marine biology from Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Contact Caroly at  cshumway@merrimack.org or (978) 655-4742. 


Joshua Chase, Landscape-Scale GIS Manager
Joshua ChaseIMGP4593 joined the MRWC in September of 2014 after having been a volunteer for 8 months. He brings a wide ranging knowledge of GIS, green infrastructure, regional land use planning, and stormwater management practices. He is coauthor of the Climate Change Adaptation Chapter for the Town of Marshfield’s Master Plan, the first Master Plan in Massachusetts to include a chapter specifically on climate change. He has a BA in Biology from Roger Williams University and a MS in Regional Planning from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.


Deanne Guardino, Director of Development
IMG_1255Deanne Guardino joined MRWC as Director of Development in December, 2014, after having served as a volunteer for 3 months. In her role as Acting Director of Development, she was primarily responsible for organizing the MerriFEST2014 event for MRWC. Ms. Guardino has a passion for environmental causes as well as a history of working with non-profits, lending her voice in advocacy for the rights of humans and animals. Ms. Guardino brings over 20 years of Marketing Communications, PR, Advertising, Event Planning and Graphic Design skills to this position. She graduated with high honors, earning her AA, with a minor in Journalism and Advertising as well as a certificate in Commercial Arts
