What’s a watershed?

A watershed is the area of land that drains into a body of water such as a river, lake, stream, or bay.  It is separated from other watersheds by high points in the area such as hills or slopes.  It includes not only the waterway itself, but also the land area that drains into them.

No matter where you are in Massachusetts, you are in a watershed.  Watersheds are everywhere—from your front doorstep to the local park to the shopping mall and the creek down the road. Watersheds are the link between our land, our water, and our communities because the quality and quantity of our water is linked to how we use the watershed surrounding it.

Take a moment to think what the Merrimack River Watershed means to you. Your watershed gives you water for drinking, fishing, and boating.  It gives you water for your gardens, for your pots and pans, for bathing and swimming.  Your watershed supports critical wildlife habitat, generates renewable energy, and creates jobs. Your watershed drives tourism, increases property values, and helps stimulate the local economy.  And  the watershed connects us – because no matter where we fall on the map, we all live downstream.  Your watershed is the link that joins you, your family, and your neighbors through the choices that you make every day.

Educational Opportunities

In 2012, with funding generously provided by Enel Green Power North America, Inc, the MRWC and our partner Groundwork Lawrence provided environmental education to middle school students.  Specifically, we provided nine lessons on various environmental topics.

 

For 2012-2013, with support from the Greater Lowell Community Foundation and Enel Green Power North America, Inc,. we have created a standards-based curriculum guide and field trips for area teachers.

Interpretive workshops and materials for the classrom
?For teachers to use: We offer 25 interactive workshops covering diverse topics, ranging from the water cycle to ecosystems and human impacts on water resources. These workshops, as well as some of the materials required are available for teachers to borrow.
?For us to lead: We can also come into the classroom to do a workshop for your students. This program is targeted toward middle school students and provides them with hands-on ways of learning about the environment around them.

 

Field Trips

We also provide a variety of field trips for middle school and high school students that we can arrange and lead for your classroom. Locations include both natural and historically significant sites along the Merrimack River which are designed to help students gain a better appreciation of the watershed they live in. A few examples of field trip locations are:
?Lowell National Historical Park and Riverwalk
?Lawrence Riverfront State Park
?The Cranberry Bog Reservation, Chelmsford
?The Methuen Rail Trail Bird Sanctuary
?Plum Island, Newburyport
?Franconia Notch New Hampshire, the headwaters of the Merrimack River

Please call us at (978) 655-4742, or email us at info@merrimack.org to learn more about the diverse, standard-based  educational material and experiences we can provide for your classroom!

Check out this curriculum outline for more information on field trips or classroom ideas:

Curriculum Outline
